New Bandage Could Avert Thousands of Deaths

	It is a common, yet horrifying image. A traffic accident, a shooting, a fall or a stabbing. And the victim lies dead in a pool of blood, life drained away by severe hemorrhaging that could not be stopped in time.
	As blood is the fluid of life, the loss of it can be the harbinger of death. Blood loss through wounds claims tens of thousands of lives each year, but researchers are working to change that by developing a type of bandage that clots blood instantly.
	Scientists with the American Red Cross have teamed with United States Army researchers to produce bandages and other dressings that they say can seal a severe, bleeding wound in seconds with a tough, artificial scab.
	After about eight years of work in the laboratory and with animals, the researchers say the sealants are almost ready for human trials.
	If the dressings prove effective and safe in the real world, scientists say, they could radically change emergency treatment for civilians and soldiers, saving thousands of lives now routinely lost.
	They foresee that these dressings will be carried not only by ambulances, but also in police cars, fire trucks and other emergency vehicles that arrive first on trauma scenes, and potentially placed in first aid kits in remote locations to be used before medical help arrives.
	''Fifty thousand people in the United States bleed to death per year, 30,000 in hospitals and 20,000 in the streets,'' said Dr. William Drohan, director of the plasma development branch of the Red Cross's Jerome H. Holland Laboratory for the Biomedical Sciences in Rockville, Md. ''We think we can make a difference in this with something very simple, something so practical it could be available and used almost anywhere.''
	The military interest in an improved field bandage is also obvious, Dr. Drohan said. Of the soldiers who die on the battlefield, 50 percent bleed to death, he said, and having soldiers carry clotting bandages as part of their gear could increase their chances of survival.
	Dr. Barbara Alving, a blood expert with the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, said that if the new bandages proved effective, they could have a big impact upon emergency care. Doctors may see fewer patients who have gone into shock from blood loss, but may also see an increase in severely injured people who otherwise would have died before reaching the hospital, she said.
	The idea is to take two human blood plasma proteins, fibrinogen and thrombin, which are key components in stopping bleeding, and concentrating them at the site of the wound to speed the natural clotting process. While the concept is not new, finding a practical and safe way of doing it has challenged scientists for decades.
	The Army worked on blood-clotting bandages during World War II, but abandoned the effort for two reasons. It could not find an efficient way to mass-produce the clotting proteins from plasma, the clear liquid part of whole blood where they are found. More importantly, Army doctors found that diseases like hepatitis could be transmitted through infected plasma and plasma products, and the technology did not exist to purify contaminated blood.
	Technical advances in blood work, brought on in part by recent efforts to cleanse blood products that might be contaminated with the virus that causes AIDS and by the discovery of new ways of isolating fibrinogen and thrombin from each other until they are needed, have opened up new approaches to making clotting dressings, scientists say.
	With support from the Army, the Red Cross has developed methods, for which it is seeking patent rights, to bring clotting ingredients together in several forms to make easy-to-use sealants for different types of wounds.
	Most of the effort has gone into a bandage,  embedded with clotting proteins, that is pressed into a wound and held in place for a couple of minutes.
	The researchers have also developed a self-expanding sealant foam that can be propelled from a container into deep wounds or the body cavity to contact internal bleeding sites. The team is also investigating a dry spray that would be squirted on a large, open wound or a burned area.
	''This is a revolutionary way of using an old technology,'' said Dr. Martin J. MacPhee, the principal Red Cross scientist working on the project. ''And by delivering 10 to 20 times more clotting factors to a wound than naturally available in the blood, it can stop a gushing hemorrhage with a clot that is much, much stronger than normal.''
	When there is a bloody injury, thrombin activates small blood cells called platelets, which collect at the site to form a loose plug.
	Thrombin interacts with fibrinogen to form an insoluble compound called fibrin, which binds platelets to other proteins in the wound to form a clot and scab. Because the two clotting proteins begin forming fibrin as soon as they come into contact, using them outside the normal process requires that they remain separated until needed.
	For years, surgeons have taken fibrinogen and thrombin liquids and mixed them in the operating room to form a glue-like biological adhesive that they used to control minor and moderate bleeding along sutures and other parts of surgical wounds.
	Commercial products that do the same thing, often with the clotting proteins separated in special double syringes, have been available in Europe for a decade. Last year, the Food and Drug Administration approved use of the first such fibrin sealants for surgical procedures in the United States.
	Working with a team led by Col. John R. Hess at the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Red Cross researchers developed a way to freeze-dry human fibrinogen and thrombin that had been filtered and cleaned to remove most bacteria and viruses.
	These proteins are freeze-dried to a special backing to form a bandage that can be absorbed by the body if left in a wound. The bandage is then sealed in an airtight foil pack to keep out moisture that can activate it, and the pack is sterilized with gamma-ray radiation using a patented process developed by Indico Technologies of Bellevue, Wash.
	Dr. Drohan said these techniques allowed  the two clotting proteins to be packaged together at room temperature without reacting with each other unless moistened. The bandage uses blood itself as the liquid to activate the clotting process, the researchers said.
	Modern sterilization procedures remove or destroy almost all bacteria and viruses from blood products, but a small risk of contamination always remains, Dr. MacPhee said.
	To eliminate even this tiny risk, and to assure an ample supply of clotting proteins without having to process vast quantities of plasma, the Red Cross is sponsoring research at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, in Blacksburg, Va., to alter pigs genetically to produce the pure human clotting proteins in their milk, he said. Ample supplies of the pure proteins would be used to mass-produce the bandages.
	Animal tests of the dry fibrin sealant dressings conducted by Dr. John B. Holcomb and colleagues at the Army Institute for Surgical Research in San Antonio showed that the bandages were much more effective in stopping bleeding from surgical and trauma wounds than the standard gauze pressure bandage.
	The new bandage reduced blood loss by 65 percent to 85 percent, they reported, and greatly decreased the loss of arterial blood pressure that leads to shock.
	The researchers said human trials of the bandage were about a year away. Negotiations are under way to find a manufacturing partner to make the bandages for the tests. If successful, the bandages could receive Food and Drug Administration approval as a medical device in three to five years, they estimate. Human tests of the fibrin sealant foam are at least another two or three years away, they said.
	Initial human tests of the bandage will probably be with surgical patients undergoing operations, like prostate gland removal, that normally result in heavy bleeding.
	These may be followed later by trauma studies, perhaps at centers that treat bloody liver and spleen injuries, the scientists said.
