Trauma Medicine: Stepchild No More

	Despite huge advances in medicine and technology, trauma care has, in many ways, been stuck in the past century, medical experts say. A soldier wounded in Iraq will get the same salt solution that was used in Korea. Army doctors in Iraq have the same problems storing blood that plagued doctors decades ago. No one yet knows the best way to treat a head injury. And it is unclear whether drugs can stem hemorrhages from internal bleeding.
	One reason trauma research has languished, scientists say, is that the Defense Department, the institution with perhaps the biggest interest in improving care for sudden, serious injuries, was long prohibited by law from participating in most clinical research in trauma or financing it.
	The law was changed last year, spurred by the efforts of an Army nurse who was appalled by what she saw in Kosovo. Now a multitude of opportunities are opening for trauma research.
	The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute is joining with the Army to support studies in resuscitation, and it plans to set up a network of trauma research centers, said Dr. Claude Lenfant, the institute's director. It is the first time the institute has worked with the Defense Department, he said. ''Our decision is very serious; it's made,'' he added.
	Northfield Laboratories, a small company that has developed artificial blood, is about to start a large clinical trial in trauma centers including one at an Army center in San Antonio. Other studies are being planned, with enthusiastic military doctors urging them on.
	Trauma surgeons like Dr. David Hoyt of the University of California at San Diego say they see the approach of a new era. ''We hope this is going to finally represent an opportunity to do true prospective clinical trials in an organized fashion in multiple centers,'' Dr. Hoyt said. Although such studies are the norm in most of medicine, they have rarely happened in trauma because of the difficulties of obtaining consent from the patients, who are usually unconscious when treatment has to begin.
	A result, said Col. John Holcomb, who directs the Army Institute of Surgical Research in San Antonio, should be a vast improvement in trauma care. Trauma ''can be prevented and treated,'' he said.
	''It really is a disease.''
	Lt. Col. Jimmie Keenan, the Army nurse who helped bring on the change, said her eyes were opened one day in June 1999 when a 32-year-old Albanian man was carried into a 30-bed field hospital where she was the head nurse. ''He was more dead than alive,'' she said.
	The man had gunshot wounds on the right and left sides of his chest, his abdomen, back and left ear, as well as injuries to his right hand. He was bleeding rapidly, and even after surgeons repaired some of his wounds, it looked as if he was going to die for lack of blood. So the staff members with a matching blood type rolled up their sleeves and gave the man their own blood. They saved his life.
	Then a 6-year-old boy came in, shot in the back while he was outside playing hide-and-seek. The bullet struck his liver and the child was bleeding so profusely that no one thought he could survive. Once again, staff members rolled up their sleeves. ''He lived,'' Colonel Keenan said. ''It was amazing. He was so near death's door.''
	She was haunted by the incidents. ''They were doing that back in the Civil War,'' she said. ''I just kept thinking: 'Don't we have a blood substitute yet? Aren't we working on one?' '' She said she could not imagine why the Defense Department had not developed, perfected and tested artificial blood.
	In 2000, after she had returned to the United States and begun working as a Congressional fellow for Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas, she found out why. She visited Colonel Holcomb, who told her that he knew of promising substances like artificial blood but that he could not do anything to hasten their testing and approval.
	A 1972 law prohibited the Defense Department from engaging in any clinical research unless the subjects or their next of kin gave explicit informed consent in advance. That ruled out most trauma research: the patients were generally unconscious, and their next of kin were usually unavailable.
	The same problem had plagued civilian trauma research until 1996, when the federal regulations applying to research by nonmilitary doctors was changed to allow so-called community consent. Under the new rules, researchers can get a blanket consent from communities, automatically enrolling patients who are unable to sign consent forms or have relatives who cannot be found in time.
	The researchers must advertise the study and explain it at meetings. But military research was not included.
	''When I think about all the things the military has contributed, yellow fever vaccine, Medevac, I said, 'This doesn't make sense,' '' Colonel Keenan said. With the support of Senator Hutchison, she began drafting legislation, and soon trauma surgeons were sending letters supporting it.
	One of the most persistent was Dr. Howard Champion, a retired trauma surgeon from the Washington Hospital Center. He had been frustrated by the slow pace of research in trauma and had started an advocacy group to try to encourage financing and research by the National Institutes of Health. But little had happened.
	The military, he said, supported the development of substances that might help in trauma, like a lightweight salt solution to restore fluids to injured soldiers, but it was never tested in the large clinical trials that are necessary before it can be sold.
	''They couldn't get anyone to test it, and they couldn't test it themselves,'' Dr. Champion said. The standard salt solution, Ringer's solution, was developed at least 50 years ago to treat diarrhea.
	''The standard of care is 1,000 c.c.'s of Ringer's, and if that doesn't work, give another 1,000 c.c.'s,'' Dr. Champion said. Each 1,000 cubic centimeter package weighs about 2.2 pounds. ''That's quite a lot of weight when you're running up a hill under gunfire,'' he said. A friend told him that in the Falkland Islands war, he could always tell where troops had been running from gunfire, he said. ''Those who were carrying those 1,000-c.c. bags of Ringer's jettisoned them. You could see the glistening bags among the grasses.''
	(That is true, Colonel Holcomb said, but he added that after the first firefight, medics would realize how important Ringer's was. ''They go back and pick it up,'' he said.)
	In Iraq, the Army is testing alternatives, like Hextend, a fluid that does not to be refrigerated and stays in the blood vessels, unlike Ringer's, which seeps out. It appears that a half-liter of Hextend may be the equivalent of three liters of Ringer's. But that equivalence, Dr. Holcomb said, needs to be tested in a large clinical trial, one of the many studies he and others are planning among civilians, who would be given the fluids in ambulances.
	Dr. Donald Jenkins, chief of trauma at the Air Force's Wilford Hall Medical Center in San Antonio, said that the next step might be even more impressive. What if the fluid in the medic's backpack is more than just a salt solution? What if it is more like blood itself, able to provide oxygen to tissues?
	''Wow!'' Dr. Jenkins said. ''Now you've changed that paradigm.''
	One way to do it would be to use artificial blood, which has been a longtime interest of the military. Dr. Steven Gould, a trauma surgeon who is the chairman and chief executive of Northfield Laboratories, said he began working on a blood substitute in 1969 as part of a small research team in Chicago. The Army supplied the research money, he said.
	The concept was simple. Oxygen is carried in blood by hemoglobin, a protein in red blood cells. If you got rid of the cell and just used hemoglobin, it could in theory supply tissues with oxygen on its own. But when researchers tried that approach, it ended in disaster, with injuries to major organs, including the liver and kidneys. A likely reason is that hemoglobin disables a small molecule, nitric oxide, in blood vessels, preventing them from relaxing. With narrowed blood vessels, vital organs do not get enough blood.
	''The last trial of unmodified hemoglobin was in 1978,'' Dr. Gould said. Researchers from Warner Lambert gave tiny amounts of the protein to six healthy volunteers. ''They saw these toxicities,'' he said. ''It happened 100 percent of the time, to every one of them.'' Dr. Gould called one of the drug company scientists. ''He said: 'It's worse than it sounds in the paper. It scared the daylights out of us.' ''
	But it appears that the toxicities disappear if the hemoglobin molecules are linked together in chains. The only problem, Dr. Gould said, is that virtually no small unlinked hemoglobin molecules can be in the mixture. ''We gradually started to purify,'' he said, testing the substance in baboons and finding that he had to go below 1 percent unlinked hemoglobin or the artificial blood was dangerous.
	With its solution of purified chains of hemoglobin, the company began small studies and was buoyed by success. Doctors have given as much as 20 units, or pints, of the artificial blood, PolyHeme, in 20 minutes, Dr. Gould said. An adult normally has about 10 units of blood. But with a severely injured patient, blood loss can be so rapid that it is lost as quickly as it is given, necessitating transfusions of 20 or even 30 units.
	But will artificial blood work? The company is starting community notification for a clinical trial involving 20 medical centers, with 700 patients randomly assigned to receive either Ringer's solution or PolyHeme in an ambulance. The Army will be part of the study.
	Dr. Jenkins of the Air Force says he wants to participate, too. ''We're sure going to push for it,'' he said.
